HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Gwen Ifill and Judy Woodruff are
away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: The
candidates
campaign in Florida.
We check in on this year's
battleground map.
Also ahead: up in flames.
Samsung stops all production of
their Galaxy
Note 7 smartphones for catching
fire.
Plus: Refugee children fleeing
war find safety
in Greece, but face resistance
at school in
their new home.
AMMAR ZAITOON, Refugee: We have
the right
to teach all of our children.
We like life.
We like education.
Syrian people are very good
workers.
And when they study, they will
be good in
school.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: It was another
contentious
day on the campaign trail on the
ground and
online, as the candidates turn
their focus
to a handful of key states.
Lisa Desjardins reports.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Oh, what these politicians have
done to us.
LISA DESJARDINS: The Republican
Party's civil
war raged again this morning on
Donald Trump's
favorite platform, Twitter.
The GOP nominee sent a flurry of
tweets criticizing
his party, calling House Speaker
Paul Ryan
an ineffective leader one day
after Ryan told
GOP members of Congress he will
not defend
Trump.
Trump followed by calling his
opponents within
the party disloyal Republicans
who don't know
how to win.
And, in person, Trump was on the
attack, too,
after saying the shackles are
off.
Speaking to thousands last night
in Wilkes-Barre,
Pennsylvania, he doubled down on
jailing opponent
Hillary Clinton if elected.
DONALD TRUMP: Lock her up is
right.
When I said we are going to get
a special
prosecutor to figure this deal
out...
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: I have never been
so ashamed
of this country as what's gone
on with Hillary
Clinton.
LISA DESJARDINS: Clinton, for
her part, was
in Miami this afternoon, joined
on stage by
a man who represents the
importance of each
Florida vote, former Vice
President Al Gore.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I'm running against a guy who
denies science,
denies climate change, says it's
a hoax created
by the Chinese.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I can't
wait to have
Al Gore advising me when I am
president of
the United States.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: The event's
focus on climate
change is part of a push for
younger voters.
Also today, Clinton proposed
doubling the
child tax credit to $2,000 per
child.
She not alone in the Sunshine
State today.
Donald Trump plans a rally on
the Florida
Panhandle tonight.
And that tells us something.
Florida is one of 10 states
where campaigns
are focused, where either
Clinton or Trump
has been in the last two weeks.
Five of those, Florida,
Pennsylvania, New
Hampshire, Michigan and Ohio,
have seen the
most visits.
Clinton's rally in Columbus,
Ohio, just last
night drew one of her biggest
crowds of the
cycle, some 18,000 people.
Both candidates now have just 28
days to reach
what polls say is a shrinking
number of undecided
voters.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We will have
more on the
fight in the battleground states
and unpack
the latest hack of Clinton
campaign e-mails
released by WikiLeaks.
In the day's other news: Russian
jets resumed
heavy bombing of Aleppo, Syria,
after days
of relative calm.
At least 16 people were killed
there today
in airstrikes on rebel-held
neighborhoods.
Recent drone footage showed the
scale of the
devastation in eastern parts of
the city.
Meanwhile, French President
Francois Hollande
criticized Moscow's actions in
Syria, just
as Russian President Vladimir
Putin canceled
a trip to Paris.
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE, French
President (through
translator): I think it is
necessary to have
dialogue with Russia.
But it must be firm and frank.
Otherwise, it has no role to
play.
Otherwise, it's just a charade.
So I'm ready to meet President
Putin if we
can make progress on peace, stop
the bombings
and implement a cease-fire.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In Southern
Syria, rebels
fired rockets at government-held
areas.
One hit a primary school,
killing at least
six people, mostly children.
It's been another long day for
thousands of
people coping with the aftermath
of Hurricane
Matthew.
The U.S. death toll rose to at
least 30 today.
Half of those deaths were in
North Carolina.
Meanwhile, President Obama
signed a disaster
declaration for South Carolina.
And in hard-hit Haiti, there
were rising fears
of disease.
William Brangham has our report
on the day's
developments.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Main streets
turned into
waterways, as rescuers boarded
boats and helicopters
again today to search for people
stranded
in the deluge.
Some 1,500 people became trapped
in the town
of Lumberton, North Carolina,
when a river
there began overflowing on
Sunday.
This morning, North Carolina
Governor Pat
McCrory urged those who could to
leave, and
fast.
GOV.
PAT MCCRORY (R), North Carolina:
Get out.
Get out now.
You are putting not only your
life at jeopardy.
You are putting our emergency
rescue teams
in jeopardy.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: One new death
in the state
wasn't by water.
Last night, state troopers shot
and killed
an armed man during a
search-and-rescue mission.
Governor McCrory would only say
the shooting
happened under -- quote -- "very
difficult
circumstances."
Floodwaters continue to inundate
towns like
Lumberton after Hurricane
Matthew poured more
than a foot of water on Eastern
North Carolina
from the capital, Raleigh, south
to Fayetteville
and beyond.
Interstate 95 was still
inundated and blocked
off near the South Carolina
border, severing
the major north-south route
along the East
Coast for another day.
Hundreds of other roads were
flooded or damaged,
leaving whole neighborhoods cut
off.
In Moore County, residents were
evacuated
late last night as crews worked
until morning
to shore up a dam that
threatened to burst.
Where the waters have receded,
the damage
is ruinous.
Bob Swilley piled up 400
sandbags to protect
his Fayetteville print shop from
the waters,
all in vain.
BOB SWILLEY, Flood Victim:
Saturday night,
this flooded over.
It just -- of course, you can
see the damage
here.
And it came over the road, came
over the road,
into the bottom of our building.
That's where all of our
equipment is.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The scale of
the destruction
is still unclear as the flooding
continues,
but thousands of homes have been
damaged already.
And half-a-million are still
without power
throughout the Southeast.
Still, nowhere was more
devastated by Hurricane
Matthew than the Caribbean
nation of Haiti,
where cleanup efforts pressed on
today amid
catastrophic damage, but another
potential
deadlier crisis is emerging in
the impoverished
country.
New cases of cholera have spiked
dramatically
due to a lack of safe water.
An outbreak after the 2010
earthquake killed
more than 10,000 people and
sickened 800,000.
The World Health Organization
said today it
was sending one million doses of
cholera vaccine
to hinder any new epidemic.
Sean Casey is the International
Medical Corps
in Haiti.
The "NewsHour" reached him by
phone in the
port town of Les Cayes.
SEAN CASEY, International
Medical Corps: In
addition to the myriad health
challenges we
have after a disaster, we now
have a cholera
outbreak on top of it, which
requires additional
health resources, but which is
also pulling
health resources away from
primary care services
that are also needed.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In the south,
where Hurricane
Matthew struck, about a quarter
of the health
facilities have been destroyed
or severely
damaged.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In China, more
than 1,000
protesters demonstrated today
outside the
Defense Ministry in Beijing.
Many wore army uniforms and
stood for hours
outside the ministry to denounce
military
downsizing and problems with
veterans' pensions.
Hundreds of police used buses
and other vehicles
to obstruct views of the
protest.
The World Health Organization
called today
for higher taxes on sugary
drinks.
Officials at the U.N. health
agency said it
could cut consumption of the
drinks and help
fight obesity and diabetes.
As of 2014, 11 percent of men
and 15 percent
of women were classified as
obese, more than
500 million people around the
world.
Thousands of nurses in Minnesota
have reached
a tentative deal to end a strike
that began
Labor Day.
The governor announced the
agreement after
a 17-hour mediation between the
Minnesota
Nurses Association and five
hospitals.
The nurses walked out over
issues including
health insurance.
They're set to vote on the
agreement Thursday.
And stocks fell sharply on Wall
Street today,
led by heavy losses in the
health care sector
and a drop in oil prices.
The Dow Jones industrial average
plummeted
200 points to close at 18128.
The Nasdaq fell nearly 82
points, and the
S&P 500 lost 27.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Samsung's
mounting smartphone troubles; a
look at must-win
states for the presidential
candidates; a
country inundated with child
refugees sends
them to school; and much more.
It's an eventful day and a
humbling one for
the electronic giant Samsung,
the world's
largest maker of smartphones.
Today, the company announced
that it is halting
production of its beleaguered
Galaxy Note
7 phone.
Reports of the Note 7 catching
fire caused
the company to issue a recall
and then create
replacement devices that were
also found to
be a fire risk.
It comes, coincidentally, as a
prolonged battle
between Apple and Samsung over
money, patents
and the designs of those phones
you use went
before the U.S. Supreme Court
today.
Jessi Hempel is with
Backchannel, a Web-based
platform that covers the tech
world.
She joins us now.
So, tell us a little bit about
the issues
surrounding this.
We have seen dribs and drabs of
people saying,
look at this burned-out battery,
look at this
burned-out shell.
How long has this been going on?
How serious it is?
JESSI HEMPEL, Backchannel: Well,
it's quite
serious.
I mean, it's really impossible
to underestimate
how serious this is for Samsung.
It's been a month-and-a-half.
You know, at first, when the
phones started
catching fire, Samsung acted
decisively and
immediately and got a lot of
credit for that.
It said, we issued a recall.
People went and returned their
phones.
And then the new phones started
catching fire.
And that's when it became a very
serious problem
for Samsung.
It suggests that we really can't
trust the
brand.
And, frankly, when people think
about this,
yes, maybe they will remember
that it's the
Samsung Galaxy Note 7, or maybe
they will
just think about the brand name
Samsung.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Right.
And that's a big company.
They make everything from
washers and dryers
to lots of other bigger things.
JESSI HEMPEL: Yes.
Right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But how
important is this?
This is sort of the flagship
phone, the thing
they're supposed to be the most
proud of.
JESSI HEMPEL: This is their
flagship phone.
And, therefore, it's really
important.
And it's important for a couple
reasons.
First off, this was what they
put forward
to compete with Apple's new
iPhone.
And, quite frankly, it didn't
work.
It will be a huge financial loss
for the company.
Now, it's hard to say exactly
how much, and
it will be a while before we
know, but I have
seen estimates put it at between
$4 and $5
billion.
So it's very important.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, so,
speaking
of Apple, they're in the Supreme
Court today,
the arguments.
JESSI HEMPEL: Right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What's the
sort of core
of the disagreement between
Apple and Samsung?
JESSI HEMPEL: You know, anybody
who has watched
Samsung and Apple over the last
five years
has seen this play out in
ticktock, this ongoing
fight between Samsung and Apple.
What's at issue today is no
longer the question
of, did Samsung copy Apple?
Yes, everyone has agreed Samsung
has copied
Apple.
It's no longer the question of,
should Samsung
pay Apple?
Yes, the courts have agreed.
Samsung already paid Apple.
What is at question now is, how
much money
does Samsung really owe Apple?
Now, the courts, the federal
courts in California
said, according to the law,
Samsung owed the
total profit on the phones that
it ripped
off pieces of the design from
Apple.
Samsung at this point is saying,
no, wait,
hold on a minute, why should we
pay total
profit?
You're raising an objection over
three design
elements on this phone.
Surely, we shouldn't have to pay
the total
profit for the phone just over
three design
elements.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, this is
really just
about deciding how much money
either Apple
will continue to keep or if it
would have
to give it back?
JESSI HEMPEL: That's right.
And, you know, the reason why
this matters,
the reason why the Supreme Court
would even
decide to look at this right now
is because
it raises the question and the
importance
of design to a product.
And that, of course, is a big
issue for Silicon
Valley write large.
And it's been a very long time,
I think 130
years, since the courts took up
this issue
of patent, of design patent.
It gets to the question of, what
is core to
a product?
What differentiates it in the
market?
And, you know, it's funny.
These three design elements,
each on their
own, they just don't seem that
big.
There's the question of the
rectangle shape
of the face of the phone.
There's the question of the
raised glass on
the front of the phone, and then
there's the
question of the icons on the
front of the
phone.
Now, if you think about all
these things,
right, they have become central
to what we
think of as not just an iPhone
at this point,
but a smartphone.
Apple says, hey, we get credit
for that.
We designed those.
We own those.
And you owe us all the money off
of the phones
that you sold that ripped those
off.
Samsung says, well, wait a
minute, you know,
parallel to this is like a car
and a cup holder
in the car.
Would you say that if I ripped
off the design
of a cup holder in the car, that
I should
pay you the total profits on the
entire car?
Is that what differentiates it
to the consumer?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jessi Hempel
from Backchannel,
thanks so much.
JESSI HEMPEL: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Since Friday,
the anti-secrecy
group WikiLeaks has been
releasing e-mails
that were hacked from the
account of Hillary
Clinton campaign chairman John
Podesta.
The stolen messages detail how
the campaign
responded to important issues
through the
race for the White House.
It is unclear who was behind
this latest digital
theft, but, on Friday, the Obama
administration
did blame Russia for the hacking
of Democratic
Party Web sites earlier this
year and attempts
to breach state election
systems, in order
to influence the vote for
president.
Today, White House spokesman
Josh Earnest
said there will be a U.S.
response to the
alleged Russian hacking.
He told reporters aboard Air
Force One: "The
president has talked before
about the significant
capabilities that the U.S.
government has
to both defend our systems in
the United States,
but also carry out offensive
operations in
other countries.
So, there are a range of
responses that are
available to the president, and
he will consider
a response that's proportional."
With me now to sift through what
all this
means in both political and
diplomatic terms
are the "NewsHour"'s Margaret
Warner and Lisa
Desjardins.
Lisa, tell me -- let's start
with what is
in the e-mails.
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
So, this latest dump, so people
can keep track,
began on Friday.
These are about 2,000 e-mails, a
little bit
more, coming from Clinton
campaign chairman
John Podesta, obviously a very
big player
in the Clinton world now and for
years.
Now, in these, we see one of the
standout
notes that we have gotten --
there haven't
been all that many -- is from a
Clinton 2013
speech to an Italian bank.
You may have seen that quote.
In the speech that was
referenced in these
e-mails, it was purported to say
-- quote
-- "My dream is a hemispheric
common market
with open trade and open
borders."
Obviously, that's raised a lot
of questions
in this year of very heated talk
about trade
and especially after Clinton
herself came
out against one of the
largest-in-history
trade deals, the Trans-Pacific
Partnership.
And that's probably the biggest
kind of headline
that's come out of these
e-mails, but also
they include a great deal of
campaign tactics,
including a 71-page briefing,
sort of oppo
research to some extent on
Bernie Sanders.
All of this was happening during
that very
heated primary campaign.
Now, the Clinton campaign
themselves is not
confirming the authenticity of
any of these
e-mails.
It's very important to say that
WikiLeaks
has posted these.
We know they were hacked, so the
authenticity
is fair to question.
And the Clinton campaign is
pushing back strongly,
saying this is from a state
actor, and this
is obviously an illegal act in
politics.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, so,
Margaret,
how did these e-mails come to
light in the
first place?
MARGARET WARNER: Well, as Lisa
said, not only
did they come out on WikiLeaks,
this latest
batch, but there have been two
other sources,
something called Guccifer 2 and
something
called D.C.
Leaks.
And the U.S. government,
intelligence officials
and also many cyber-experts have
been sure
for -- at a 90 percent degree of
certainty
for months that two Russian spy,
cyber-spy
agencies, one tied to Russian
intelligence,
one tied to Russian military
had been behind these.
These have been known for
months.
FBI Director James Comey did
tell the Congress,
in fact, he said, "We're trying
to determine
just what mischief Russia is up
to in connection
with our election."
So, there is a difference
between the hacking
and the leaking.
And the Russian M.O., U.S.
officials believe,
is that they do the hacking, and
then they
give them to others to do the
leaking.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, so
let's talk
a little bit about the timing,
coincidence
or not, in an election year?
What's the political fallout?
LISA DESJARDINS: Well, the
fallout, first
of all, has not been related
directly to the
content of these e-mails.
I think the worst fallout for
Hillary Clinton
is whenever the topic of e-mails
comes up,
whenever the idea comes out that
maybe she
and her strategists are doing
things in secret
that the public don't know
about.
The truth is, there is no
indication of any
wrongdoing.
This is typical campaign
operations for the
most part in these e-mails.
Some, you could say, are not
good on style
or there's infighting or
whatever, but there
is really no indication of
wrongdoing here.
Instead, this whole concept of
e-mails and
a shadowy Clinton world is the
problem for
her, which they say is all sort
of a shadow
conspiracy.
But I think there's a greater
issue here,
Hari, in that what these e-mails
are doing
is, it's changing how our
political operatives
communicate.
For example, I know sources now
who will not
communicate with me over e-mail,
who must
communicate by phone.
When our leaders aren't able to
talk to each
other over the most common
device they use,
that's a success for the
opponents of the
United States.
And that's something that may be
happened
now already.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Margaret, that
statement
from Josh Earnest, that the U.S.
has the potential
for a proportional response,
what can the
administration do?
This was almost one of the first
explicit
moments where we said we are in
an active
cyber-war.
MARGARET WARNER: Well, in which
we outed somebody,
another country.
The only other one ever outed is
North Korea.
Russia has done previous hacks
of U.S. government
databases, and so have the
Chinese.
This time, it was different.
First, the reasons they did it,
I was told
by a senior cyber-official, had
a lot to do
with the upcoming debate.
Julian Assange had been saying
there was going
to be a new dump.
The administration strongly
believes, as Lisa
said, that this is all aimed to
help Trump
and hurt Clinton.
And so this was definitely, at a
time a very
high tension with the Russians
anyway over
Aleppo, a way of trying the
neutralize Trump
from saying, who knows if the
Russians are
behind it?
Of course he said it again.
What's in the kit bag?
A lot of things for the United
States to retaliate.
The name and shame may be the
only thing it
does, trying the put Russia on
notice that,
look, you're crossing a line
here because
you're interfering with, as Lisa
again said,
the sanctity of the American
election system,
not just communications, but the
real sanctity
here, sowing mistrust and doubt.
But, certainly, if the U.S.
wanted to turn
out all the lights in Moscow, it
could, but
Russia could do the same to New
York.
So, the administration has been
reluctant
to get into any kind of real
cyber-war.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Margaret
Warner, Lisa Desjardins,
thanks so much.
The head of WikiLeaks, Julian
Assange, has
said they could release 100,000
pages of new
material before the election.
We turn now to take a closer
look at two key
battleground states.
John Yang is our guide.
JOHN YANG: Early voting begins
tomorrow in
Ohio and Arizona, two states
where the presidential
candidates are running
neck-and-neck.
From Ohio, long considered a
political bellwether,
we are joined by Karen Kasler.
She's statehouse bureau chief
for Ohio Public
Radio and TV.
And Christopher Conover is a
reporter for
Arizona Public Media, where
polls show the
Grand Canyon state could turn
blue this year
for the first time in decades.
Karen and Christopher, thanks so
much for
joining us.
Let me start in Arizona.
Christopher, the Republican
presidential nominee
has won Arizona every election
but one since
1948.
Why is it so close this time?
CHRISTOPHER CONOVER, Arizona
Public Media:
This year is, I think, just an
interesting
year.
In 1996, Bill Clinton was the
last Democrat
to win.
If you look at Arizona when it
comes to voter
registration, the state is split
almost evenly
in thirds, with independents,
Republicans,
and Democrats making up those
large portions.
Independents are the largest
bloc.
They picked up 51,000 new voters
just this
week.
So, the state is split very
interestingly
along political lines.
And Arizona's always marched to
its own drummer
a little bit also politically.
JOHN YANG: Karen, Ohio has
always been a swing
state, a decider in elections.
What are the forces shaping the
race this
time?
KAREN KASLER, Ohio Public Radio:
Well, I think
you have polling in Ohio before
the tapes
over the weekend were released
that showed
that Clinton and Trump were
very, very close.
The Quinnipiac poll last week
had Trump up
by five points.
The Monmouth poll had Clinton up
by two points,
so a very close race.
You have got three major
markets.
You have got a lot of rural
voters.
You have got a lot of things
that are going
on here.
And Trump is reaching out to
voters in some
of these areas where Republicans
haven't necessarily
done well.
That's what the Republican Party
chair, Matt
Borges, has even said.
And you see Trump going to areas
like Youngstown,
which is typically Democratic,
that has a
lot of blue-collar voters that
Trump seems
to be reaching.
He is reaching a lot of voters
in areas where
the unemployment rate is higher
than it is
nationally.
And so you have got that going
on, but Clinton
has also reached out.
She was just here yesterday with
her largest
crowd to date at Ohio State
University.
So, she's reaching out in some
of these areas.
So, you have got these two
forces together.
This was Clinton's first
appearance back in
Ohio for quite a while, though.
Some people had wondered if she
had abandoned
the Buckeye State, but her
campaign said that
was absolutely not the case.
And, in fact, President Obama
will be here
on Thursday.
Donald Trump will also be here
We start early voting tomorrow
statewide in
Ohio, so I think that's part of
the reason
why both those campaigns will be
here.
JOHN YANG: Karen, you mentioned
that videotape,
of course.
What is the -- is it too early
to tell or
can you tell what the impact is
in Ohio?
KAREN KASLER: I think there are
a lot of undecided
voters who are very concerned
about that tape.
And you have a lot of Christian
evangelical
voters, you have a lot of voters
who are independent
voters who are very concerned
about that tape.
And Donald Trump's weakness has
been in some
Republican counties like the
state's most
Republican county, Delaware
County, which
is just north of Columbus.
He had not done well there.
And that's a county that he
really, I think,
was hoping to get.
And so I think it's a little
early to really
figure out what the impact of
those tapes
will be.
And you have got the Ohio
Republican chair,
Matt Borges, again saying that
he has talked
to Donald Trump personally, and
that Trump
has assured him that there will
be no other
incidents, no other tapes, no
other things
like this coming out that could
be problematic.
And he says he's talking him at
his word.
And so I think there are a lot
of Republicans
who are questioning that right
now.
And, of course, you have got
three major Republican
officeholders in Ohio, Governor
John Kasich,
U.S. Senator Rob Portman and
state auditor
Dave Yost, who, over the
weekend, came out
and said they would no longer
vote for Donald
Trump.
And in a year where endorsements
haven't mattered
a whole lot, I'm wondering what
the impact
of that will be.
JOHN YANG: And, Christopher, in
Arizona, of
course, Senator John McCain over
the weekend
said he would no longer -- would
split from
Donald Trump.
But is it -- can you tell yet
what the impact
is among voters of that
videotape?
CHRISTOPHER CONOVER: We really
can't tell
yet.
As you said, Senator McCain, who
has had a
rocky relationship with Donald
Trump, officially
split from him this weekend.
We have had others, like the
current governor,
Doug Ducey, repudiate the
statements, say
they were terrible things, but
didn't pull
his support away.
And former Governor Jan Brewer,
who has campaigned
with Donald Trump in Arizona,
was at the debates
this weekend, also had nothing
good to say
about the tapes, but is still
very openly
supporting Donald Trump.
So it's a little early to say
how it will
all play out here in Arizona
also.
JOHN YANG: And, Christopher,
Arizona, about
30 percent, I think the -- of
the voting public
is Hispanic.
A lot of rhetoric about
Hispanics and immigration,
illegal immigration in this
campaign, how
has that affected that voting
bloc?
CHRISTOPHER CONOVER: As you
said, about 30
percent of the state is
Hispanic.
What's interesting is, we don't
know how they're
going to vote because Arizona on
its voter
registration form doesn't ask
anything about
race.
So we only have to guess how
they are registered
to vote, that group is
registered to vote.
Nationally, we know that about
69 percent
of Hispanics will vote in this
election -- that's
what they're saying -- and that
the majority
of them skew towards the
Democratic Party.
However, in Arizona, we have
some very high-profile
Republican Hispanics.
So it will be very interesting
to see how
that Hispanic vote comes down,
especially
with so much that goes on with
immigration
in this campaign.
In Arizona, immigration isn't
necessarily
something we talk about,
especially in Southern
Arizona.
It's just part of life.
JOHN YANG: And, Karen, in Ohio,
with the close
poll, the voter turnout, getting
out the vote
is going to be so important.
What's the ground game look like
in Ohio,
especially since, as you pointed
out, Donald
Trump has been denied in a way
that great
ground organization that John
Kasich, the
governor, has put together?
KAREN KASLER: Yes.
And one thing that's interesting
here, first
of all, the Hillary Clinton
campaign and the
Democrats have said their ground
game is excellent.
It's the same kind of ground
game they had
in 2008 and 2012, when Barack
Obama won Ohio.
But you also have an interesting
thing that
happened in the primary, when
John Kasich
was still on the ballot.
You had a lot of people who
voted Republican
in that primary.
And so we end up now at this
point where there
are 1.9 million people in Ohio
who are affiliated
with the Republican Party, 1.1
million people
in Ohio who are affiliated with
the Democratic
Party.
There's potentially more people
that the Republican
Party could reach out to.
Whether those people will come
back and vote
Republican again remains to be
seen.
So, I think the idea that the
Republican Party
that is not necessarily united
behind Donald
Trump, even though the Ohio
Republican Party
chair says he's still going to
be working
for Trump at least, at this
point in time
-- others are saying they're
not.
Without that organization and
that unification,
will they be able to reach all
those voters
and get those people out to come
out over
Hillary Clinton and her ground
game?
JOHN YANG: Karen Kasler in
Columbus, Ohio,
Christopher Conover in Tucson,
Arizona, thanks
so much for joining us.
KAREN KASLER: Thanks.
CHRISTOPHER CONOVER: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On our Web
site: What does
weather have to do with
democracy?
A Making Sense columnist
examines how rain
and, yes, hurricane damage and
flooding can
affect elections.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
for-profit colleges
under fire from the federal
government; and
the French composer who
transformed animals
into a musical masterpiece.
But first: The Greek government
has begun
a pilot program to educate
refugee children
stranded in the country, because
nations along
the migrant trail to Northern
Europe have
closed their borders.
It is estimated there are more
than 20,000
children in refugee camps in
Greece.
The plan is being resisted by
some Greeks,
who say they worry about
refugees carrying
infections and also about the
cultural change
the plan might bring.
There have been protests in a
number of towns.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant has
been looking at the issue, and
starts his
report from Filippiada in
Western Greece.
MALCOLM BRABANT: What's your
name?
MOHAMMED ZAITOON, Refugee: My
name's Mohammed.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Where are you
from?
MOHAMMED ZAITOON: I'm from
Syria.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Yes.
And whereabouts in Syria are you
from?
MOHAMMED ZAITOON: I'm from -- I
live in Damascus.
MALCOLM BRABANT: What's your
name?
SELMA ZAITOON, Refugee: My name
is Selma.
MOHAMMED ZAITOON: I'm sad
because I don't
have school now.
And I want to go to school,
actually.
SELMA ZAITOON: I would like now
to go to school.
But I can't.
Now, here, I don't have school,
but I want
to go to school.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The children's
formal education
ended 15 months ago, when they
left Syria.
Their father is Ammar Zaitoon.
AMMAR ZAITOON, Refugee: I have
three children.
Two of them were in school.
And they always get top marks.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Like tens of
thousands of
other refugees, the Zaitoons
wanted to settle
elsewhere, but are now stuck in
Greece, where
anti-migrant sentiment is
significant, especially
over the issue of education.
AMMAR ZAITOON: We were
disappointed for that.
We want to know, why do they
don't want our
children to go to school?
We'd like something like to
speak with them
just in order to knowing us more
and more,
that we are simple people.
We have the right to teach our
children.
We like life.
We like education.
Syrian people are very good
workers.
And when they study, they will
be good in
school.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The family
lives in Filippiada,
a small town in Western Greece.
The parent-teacher association
told the Education
Ministry that under no
circumstances would
they accept children from a
nearby camp, citing
fears about cultural differences
and infectious
diseases.
They claimed their presence
would alter the
Greek character of the schools.
Most parents we approached
refused to talk.
But Christos Gartzis spoke up.
CHRISTOS GARTZIS, Greece
(through translator):
The education issue is not a
problem for us,
as all these children have the
right to education,
but, first of all, the
government have to
solve their housing problems.
They must be relocated to more
modern facilities.
These children are going to be
permanently
ill during the winter, with
colds and coughs,
viruses and maybe even
pneumonia.
What kind of schooling will we
be able to
offer them then?
MALCOLM BRABANT: Several hundred
refugees,
mainly from Syria and
Afghanistan, live in
tents in a former army base on
the outskirts
of Filippiada.
There are about 150 children who
do have the
occasional lesson from
volunteers.
But, mostly, they while away the
hours playing.
Filippiada's rejection of
refugee children
has put it beneath an
unfavorable spotlight,
and the conservative mayor,
Nikolaos Kalantzis,
has been trying to limit the
damage to the
town's reputation.
NIKOLAOS KALANTZIS, Mayor of
Filippiada, Greece
(through translator): This is a
rather unique
issue, in that the people who
have come here
don't actually want to stay
here.
They want to move on and are
seeking ways
to do so.
This is a matter of trying to
manage an interim
period for these people.
At least that's the way I see
it.
And, of course, this is not just
a problem
for Filippiada, but also for
Greece itself
and, in general, Europe, too,
since extreme
racist and nationalist feelings
are on the
rise.
But in no way whatsoever could
Filippiada
be considered as a racist town.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Like every
aspect of life
in Greece, education has been
hit by the country's
six-year-long financial crisis.
The government has been forced
to lay off
teachers, and schools like this
are being
run on half the budget
previously available
before the country went
bankrupt.
But headmaster George Gioldasis
is a strong
believer in the universal right
of children
to an education.
GEORGE GIOLDASIS, Headmaster
(through translator):
Problems definitely exist, but
we, the teachers,
together with the parents and
parent-teacher's
association, as well as the
citizens of this
town, are trying to solve them
with the limited
resources we have from the
municipality for
education.
We're trying to at least solve
the basic problems
at the moment, but, in my
opinion, much more
funding is going to be required
in order to
be able to provide the
infrastructure and
prerequisites necessary for the
integration
of refugee children into our
schools.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Greece's
education minister
says that the country has an
obligation to
provide schooling for refugee
children.
And he's announced a program
where six schools
will open up in Athens, and
there'll be three
others in towns around the
country.
Now, the minister says that this
initiative
will spread throughout Greece
through October.
The money to pay for it is
supposed to be
coming from a $1 billion fund
provided to
Greece by the European Union,
which is supposed
to help during the refugee
crisis.
But there's been strong
resistance from nationalists
in the northern town of
Oraiokastro.
The rally organizers insisted
they were just
concerned citizens.
But some rhetoric sounded
similar to that
of the ultra-right Golden Dawn
Party.
A riot police cordon prevented
clashes with
about 200 left-wing protesters.
The demonstrators emphasized
their orthodox
Christian heritage and
abhorrence of Islam.
Organizer Spiros Haravopoulos
says his ancestors
were victims of a Turkish
genocide on the
Black Sea nearly a century ago.
"We are the Greeks.
That's who we are," he shouts.
This is a place where history is
never forgotten,
especially Greece's 400 years
under the Islamic
Ottoman Empire.
SPIROS HARAVOPOULOS, Protester
Organizer (through
translator): Of course we care
about the refugees,
but let them go to other
countries, where
their own religion is widely
practiced, such
as Saudi Arabia, Qatar, the
United Arab Emirates.
We have nothing against the
refugees, but
they have been brought here
without anyone
having asked us if we want them
here.
Other people can't be allowed to
decide what
we want without us being asked
first, and
that's why we're protesting here
tonight.
Apart from the fact that they
have been terrifying
the people here, members of the
same government
that was voted into power by
citizens of this
place are calling us Nazis.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Greece belongs
to the Greeks,
bellowed lawyer Dimitris
Mihakis, as he whipped
up the crowd.
DIMITRIS MIHAKIS, Attorney
(through translator):
Are we supposed to allow this
and make our
schools just for the minority?
Do they want a Greek minority
here in Greece?
We will not permit Greek schools
to be turned
into minority schools.
The plan is obviously to cause
problems and
unrest in this country in order
to satisfy
some other fanciful geostrategic
plans which
they have in mind for us.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Despite being
the object
of fear, suspicion and hate,
Ammar Zaitoon
is remaining calm.
AMMAR ZAITOON: We know that the
Greek people
were living the same situation
in the past.
And, actually, they are good
people.
I know, sometimes, sometimes,
you don't want
to see other people in your
country.
Sometimes, you don't want to see
another -- refugees
in your country.
We respect that.
But, even so, they are very good
with us.
They receive us, and they are
trying to help
us as best as they can.
MALCOLM BRABANT: As the rally
organizers danced
in the rain, they were condemned
as fascists
by the left-wing protesters, who
chanted slogans
in support of the refugees.
"Fatherland, faith, and family.
Long live Greece," he cried.
The
government's determination to
provide classes
nationwide will be severely
tested.
A new battleground awaits the
war children.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Northern Greece.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This has been
a tough fall
in the world of for-profit
colleges, and for
some of the students who attend
them.
The latest case, the bankruptcy
and abrupt
shutdown of ITT, one of the
largest for-profit
technical schools.
Its 130 campuses were closed
last month after
the Department of Education said
it could
no longer enroll new students
who relied on
federal loans and grants to
attend.
The Obama administration cited
problems with
its accreditation and concerns
that it was
misleading students.
That has left about 35,000
students up in
the air over their future.
And it is the subject of our
weekly segment
on education, Making the Grade.
Paul Fain of the news site
Inside Higher Ed
joins me now.
So, tell us, first of all, why
is ITT shutting
down?
How important are they in the
pantheon of
the for-profit school system?
PAUL FAIN, Inside Higher Ed:
They're one of
the biggest, one of the oldest,
most-established
for-profit companies, with
campuses in 38
states.
They used to have campuses in 38
states, so
definitely one of the most
important players.
Year -- several tough years,
hemorrhaging
students and revenue.
And then they got hit with
several investigations
and lawsuits, federal and state,
some serious
charges, the Consumer Financial
Protection
Bureau, the SEC both pursuing
them legally.
And then you had an accreditor
raising questions
about their record-keeping, and
the Fed finally
said, too much risk for those
students and
taxpayers.
And there were just several
sanctions that
were really the end for the
company.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But what about
those 35,000
students?
What do they do?
PAUL FAIN: They are in a real
tough bind.
They have two major choices.
First, they can elect to have
their debt forgiven.
They can -- all the aid that
they had received,
the loans, they can have
forgiven by the federal
government.
But, if they do that, their
credits don't
transfer.
If they seek to continue their
program somewhere
else, which might be tough as
is, they might
not be able to find an option or
a similar
program nearby, those credits
won't count,
if they take the payoff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And who is the
demographic
that goes to these schools?
PAUL FAIN: Well, you're looking
at working
adults, basically, often the
first in their
family to go to college, many
veterans at
ITT and some other for-profits,
and really
just working adults looking to
advance themselves,
maybe to break into a career,
maybe to get
a credential, so they can get
out of a low-pay
job, folks who are working at
night, weekends
to try to really advance
themselves.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, it wasn't
easy for them
to try to get this route.
And now they have put in all
this time.
And if the credits don't
transfer, they might
be back at square one.
PAUL FAIN: Absolutely.
No matter what you think of ITT,
you have
to feel sorry or really
concerned about these
students, because a lot of them
are really
just trying to get ahead to
really advance
themselves.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK.
And put this in context.
This isn't the first school.
This is just the latest school
in the for-profit
world that's had problems.
We heard about Corinthian a
while back.
And there's been other schools
as well.
PAUL FAIN: Correct.
Corinthian was even larger,
72,000 students.
A couple years ago, it shut
down.
Now what remains of it in a
different owner's
hands is only about 10,000
students.
A few years ago, about one in 10
students
in America were at for-profit
institutions.
That's declined to about 6
percent of the
total, so really an existential
crisis for
these companies.
And there's a lot of reasons for
that.
But it's not clear what the
future is for
for-profit higher education.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is it the
business model?
Is that working anymore?
You see -- you used to see ads
nonstop on
TV at late night.
And it was competitive.
It was DeVry and ITT and Phoenix
Online.
PAUL FAIN: Right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And there were
so many different
opportunities.
PAUL FAIN: And they were
booming.
You had massive growth coming
right after
the recession, as folks dropped
out of the
economy and were really trying
to retool themselves,
and these schools reached out to
them.
They tended to be better than
their competitors
when it comes to advertising,
because they
had the money to do that.
But several factors have hit
them.
I mean, first of all, the
recovery has recovered
a little bit.
So, you have fewer folks looking
to go back
to school to try to find a job.
You have just waves of bad
publicity, investigations,
criticism by the media, by
lawmakers, primarily
Democrats, which I think has
taken a toll.
I think the word for-profit has
a bit of a
stigma.
And that's the companies
themselves who will
say that.
And I just think it's a harder
sell.
A lot of them are a little bit
more expensive
than community colleges.
They say they offer more
services to help
students, but it's a little
harder to get
someone to pay $15,000 or more
to go to one
of these programs.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But what do
the executives
at these companies say about
their plight
and how the environment has
changed?
PAUL FAIN: Well, first of all,
they say they
have been treated unfairly, that
this administration
and Senate Democrats have
cracked down on
them more than the rest of
higher education.
There are questions about all of
higher education's
return on investment, the value
of a degree.
I think it's quite clear that
the best way
to get a job is to get a degree.
But people are concerned about
student debt
on the whole.
But for-profit higher education
has really
received, I think, the first
wave of aggressive
federal policy to try to make
sure students
are getting what they pay for.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Paul Fain of
the news site
Inside Higher Ed, thanks for
joining us.
PAUL FAIN: Thanks for having me.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And speaking
of student
debt, college affordability has
become an
issue in the election.
We have been taking a look at
what's behind
the growth of that debt and just
how big a
problem it is.
It's part of our year-long
series How the
Deck Is Stacked, funded by the
Corporation
for Public Broadcasting.
Our partners at "Frontline" and
Marketplace
put together a video explainer
that's been
drawing some attention for
laying out the
landscape of student debt.
Marketplace host Kai Ryssdal is
our guide.
KAI RYSSDAL, Marketplace: Today,
student debt
is a staggering $1.3 trillion.
But how bad is that for the
economy and for
the people holding all that
debt?
There's a debate going on right
now, and some
experts argue, maybe it's not as
bad as we
think.
I'm Kai Ryssdal, and this is How
the Deck
Is Stacked.
One-point-three trillion
dollars.
So, how did we get here?
One reason for the growth is
simply because
many more people have been going
to college.
During the great recession, when
the economy
tanked, a lot of people couldn't
get a job,
so they decided to go back to
school, and
most people can't pay for school
without taking
out some student loans.
In 2008, about 29 million people
held student
debt.
By 2015, that was up to 40
million people.
More people in school equals
more overall
debt.
At the same time, the cost of
college also
went up, while state funding for
higher education
went down.
But, despite the rise in debt,
some experts
say that this idea of a crisis
is overblown.
Student debt is much smaller
than mortgage
debt, and so they say that
shouldn't tank
the economy.
They also argue that, for most
of those 40
million people, taking on the
debt is going
to be OK.
The reality is, only 8 percent
of debt holders
owe more than $75,000.
And many of those people went to
graduate
school, which should increase
their earning
potential.
Then there are the majority of
borrowers,
almost 70 percent, who owe less
than $25,000.
Now, that still is a whole lot
of money for
most of us.
But, on average, people with a
bachelor's
degree make around $20,000 more
a year than
those with only a high school
diploma.
So, while it may be a struggle
in the short
term, chances are, most will be
able to pay
it off.
But then there are the people
who are really
hurting, people who took out
loans, but didn't
finish school.
Most of them owe less than
$10,000, which
might seem small, but they won't
be getting
the pay boost from a degree, and
yet still
have to pay back that debt.
And with bills to pay, interest
accruing,
and fees, they can get behind
pretty quickly.
For this group, the risk of
taking on the
debt might not have been worth
it.
But, for the majority of us, the
investment
might be.
Yet many of us don't feel that
way.
We know that because you told
us.
In our Marketplace/Edison
Research Poll, nearly
40 percent of you said the
education wasn't
worth the debt.
Why is this?
Well, we're not anxious about
college debt
in a vacuum.
Right?
We have got a lot of other
economic worries
on our minds.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That video
actually was
produced for the Web in 360
degrees, where
you can point your phone in any
direction
to look around the story.
You can see the full story by
going to "Frontline"'s
Facebook page.
You can see the full story by
going to "Frontline"'s
Facebook page.
Now "The Carnival of Animals"
and a famous
composer who felt he was
celebrated for the
wrong thing.
Camille Saint Saens would have
celebrated
his 181st birthday this past
weekend.
Once again, pianist Rob Kapilow
joins Jeffrey
Brown to explore what makes
great music.
JEFFREY BROWN: Rob Kapilow,
welcome.
ROB KAPILOW, Composer: Thanks
for having me.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, today, we're
marking the
birthday of Camille Saint Saens.
This is a story of a great
composer who didn't
quite get the legacy that he
wanted.
ROB KAPILOW: During his
lifetime, I mean,
he was a famous composer, one of
the most
famous composers in the world,
writing serious
operas, serious symphonies.
JEFFREY BROWN: Tell us a little
bit about
him, for those who don't know.
ROB KAPILOW: Well, you know, he
was also one
of the world's greatest musical
prodigies.
In fact, many people think he
was even more
of a prodigy than Mozart or
Mendelssohn.
He started piano at
two-and-a-half.
He wrote his first piece at
four-and-a-half,
made a public debut at 10, in
which not only
did he play two concertos and
write his own
cadenza, but, for an encore, he
offered to
play any Beethoven sonata from
memory that
the audience wanted.
That's 32 sonatas at the age of
10, one of
the great musical proteges,
utterly famous,
yet then, for a joke, he writes
this piece
that literally became his
legacy.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, "Carnival of
the Animals,"
written for a friend, becomes
this famous
piece.
Tell us about it.
ROB KAPILOW: Yes, it was a
little party piece,
and, in it, he took 14 animals
in this grand
zoological fantasy, is what he
called it.
And each movement turns an
animal somehow
into music.
And the simplest way is to take
the sound
of the actual animal, and, in
the first movement,
that's what happens.
A lion's roar is turned into
music.
But, sometimes, for example, in
"Hemiones,"
which is a wild Tibetan donkey
famous for
running at blinding speed up and
down rough
mountains, he turns the idea of
the animal
into music, and turns that into
two pianists
running up and down the keyboard
at blinding
speed in unison.
JEFFREY BROWN: He also has this
movement called
"The Pianists."
ROB KAPILOW: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's sort of a
joke, pianist
as an animal.
ROB KAPILOW: Yes.
It's just a joke.
I mean, it's like based on the
scale.
It's based on these ridiculous
scales that
pianists do.
Maybe that's the animal that
annoys the neighbors
when the pianists are actually
playing.
JEFFREY BROWN: Pianists as
animals in a sense.
ROB KAPILOW: Pianists as
animals.
Anybody can be a joke.
Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: One movement,
"The Swan," next-to-last
movement, did become hugely --
maybe the most
famous part.
ROB KAPILOW: It became the most
famous piece
he ever wrote.
And it's interesting.
It's the only movement that he
actually allowed
to be published during his
lifetime.
JEFFREY BROWN: I visited with
Yo-Yo Ma last
year for a piece for the
"NewsHour," and he
played "The Swan" for us.
So, what makes "The Swan" work
so well?
ROB KAPILOW: Well, I think
writing the piece
so quickly gave him access to
one of the most
beautiful, simple melodies he
ever wrote.
I mean, it starts off with
nothing but the
two pianos being the rippling
waters, and
a little crest of a wave.
Then everything focuses on the
cello.
There were only three ideas.
A swan's neck dips, the same
idea lower.
Then the swan's neck rises
gracefully on a
long note, and then a simple
scale.
But one note makes it great.
We stretch it out.
Instead of this, we get this
beautiful high
note on the cello.
We go on a journey with this, we
come back,
we repeat the whole thing a
second time, and
there's a beautiful epilogue at
the end telling
us the message.
Then, for the first time, all of
a sudden,
the rippling waters stop.
We know something important is
being shared
with us now.
We journey with the piece's
three ideas, and
we finish with a simple scale
stretched out
like this.
The rippling waters stop.
We have been wanting to resolve
not up here,
but down here.
And for the first time, we
resolve the piece
on a single cello note without
accompaniment.
The accompaniment has always
been in the middle
register, not noticeable at all.
Now, after this resolution of
the cello, suddenly,
from the heavens, up here, in a
brand-new
register, the pianos take over,
those rippling
waters become the topic.
And we finish with one last
wave.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, "The Swan" is
the only
part that he did allow to be
published, but
the rest of it, he didn't
want...
ROB KAPILOW: The rest of it is
banished.
JEFFREY BROWN: He wanted it to
go away?
ROB KAPILOW: He wanted it to go
away.
He said it could be published
after he died.
But he was really worried.
Legacy was an important issue.
And he was a serious French
composer.
And that wasn't what he wanted
to be known
for.
But, somehow, what snuck into
this piece was
the most exquisite, pure,
simple, beautiful
melody that he ever wrote, "The
Swan."
JEFFREY BROWN: Rob Kapilow,
thank you very
much.
ROB KAPILOW: Thanks so much,
Jeff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And later
tonight on "Frontline":
a deep look into one of the
United States'
biggest foreign policy
challenges, confronting
ISIS.
The film uses on-the-ground
reporting and
interviews with key leaders to
try to unravel
the multidimensional war that
has the U.S.
and Russia competing on the
Mideast battlefield,
particularly in Syria.
MAN: Suddenly, boom, the
Russians are bombing.
MAN: Russian airstrikes have
killed hundreds
of civilians and caused massive
destruction
to residential areas.
NARRATOR: But the Russians were
not bombing
ISIS.
MAN: The question of exactly,
who is Russia
targeting?
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense
Secretary: What
they said they were going to do
was come in
and fight ISIL and use their
influence to
move Assad aside and thereby end
the civil
war in Syria, which has been one
of the causes
of the whole fertile ground for
ISIL.
They didn't do either of those
things.
QUESTION: So they lied to you?
ASHTON CARTER: Well, they
certainly had a
very different interpretation of
combating
ISIL.
HARI SREENIVASAN: "Frontline"
airs tonight
on most PBS stations.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: Some years,
it's bittersweet, some years,
it's just bitter,
but loving the Cubs has been a
pastime for
the "NewsHour"'s Murrey Jacobson
since he
was a boy.
Now, with sons of his own, he
has a new feeling
this year.
Read all about it on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Wednesday, our Leading Edge
series explores
the surprising way Portland,
Oregon, discovered
shocking levels of air
pollution.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.